docs/pytest_workflow.md, before:

# Pytest Workflow Guide for Jammin' Eats

This guide explains how to use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) for running, writing, and integrating tests in the Jammin' Eats project.

---

## 1. Installing Pytest

Install pytest if you haven't already:
```sh
pip install pytest
```

---

## 2. Organizing Tests

- All test files should be placed in the `tests/` directory.
- Test file names should start with `test_` (e.g., `test_gameplay.py`).
- Test functions and classes should also start with `test_`.
- You can organize tests into subfolders like `tests/unit/`, `tests/integration/`, etc.

Example structure:
```
Jammin-Eats/
├── src/
├── tests/
│   ├── test_database_initialization.py
│   ├── unit/
│   │   └── test_state_machine.py
│   └── integration/
│       └── test_tutorial_flow.py
```

---

## 3. Running Tests

- Run **all tests**:
  ```sh
  pytest
  ```
- Run tests with detailed logging (recommended for troubleshooting):
  ```sh
  python run_test.py
  ```
- Run tests in a specific file:
  ```sh
  pytest tests/test_database_initialization.py
  ```
- Run tests in a specific folder:
  ```sh
  pytest tests/unit/
  ```
- Show extra info (verbose):
  ```sh
  pytest -v
  ```
- Generate test output file (for detailed error diagnosis):
  ```sh
  pytest -v > test_output.txt 2>&1
  ```
- Run tests with full tracebacks:
  ```sh
  pytest --tb=long
  ```

---

## 4. Writing New Tests

- Create a new file in `tests/` or a subfolder, named `test_something.py`.
- Write test functions starting with `test_`:
  ```python
  def test_example():
      assert 1 + 1 == 2
  ```
- You can use fixtures for setup/teardown (see Pytest docs for advanced usage).

---

## 5. Integrating New Tests

- Place new test files in the `tests/` folder or an appropriate subfolder.
- Make sure the test file and function names start with `test_`.
- Run `pytest` to verify your new tests are discovered and executed.
- If you want to run both `unittest` and `pytest` tests, pytest will auto-discover both.

---

## 6. Continuous Integration (CI)

- Add `pytest` to your `requirements.txt` or development dependencies.
- In your CI pipeline, use the command:
  ```sh
  pytest
  ```
- This will ensure all tests are run automatically on every push or pull request.

---

## 7. Test Files Organization

Jammin' Eats has two primary test file locations:

1. **Root-level test files:** 
   - Located directly in the project root (e.g., `test_states.py`, `test_tutorial_completion.py`)
   - Used for core system validation tests that run against the main game instance

2. **Tests directory:** 
   - Located in `tests/` folder with unit and integration subdirectories
   - Contains more focused tests for individual components
   - Reference implementations for core tests

---

## 8. Using run_test.py

The project includes a custom `run_test.py` script that provides enhanced test diagnostics:

```sh
python run_test.py
```

Key features:
- Runs tests with detailed logging
- Captures full traceback and error information
- Saves output to `test_output.txt` for easier troubleshooting
- Helps diagnose test skips and failures
- Essential for resolving complex test issues

---

## 9. Additional Tips

- Use `pytest --maxfail=1 --disable-warnings -v` for fast feedback.
- Use markers (e.g., `@pytest.mark.slow`) to categorize tests.
- For mocking game objects in tests, see examples in `test_states.py`.
- When testing state transitions, ensure all required methods are mocked (e.g., `change_state`).
- When running database tests, ensure the database is properly initialized and reset between tests.
- See [pytest documentation](https://docs.pytest.org/) for advanced features.

---

**Stay modular, keep your tests organized, and enjoy reliable development!**

Commit message:

docs: update CI/CD, folder structure, technical overview, and pytest workflow guides to reflect current workflow

docs/pytest_workflow.md, after:

# Pytest Workflow Guide for Jammin' Eats

This guide explains how to use [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) for testing the Jammin' Eats project. It also details how our tests integrate with the **pre-commit** hook system, giving you immediate feedback on code quality before every commit.

---

## 1. Installing Pytest

Install pytest if you haven't already:
```sh
pip install pytest
```

---

## 2. Organizing Tests

- All test files should be placed in the `tests/` directory.
- Test file names should start with `test_` (e.g., `test_gameplay.py`).
- Test functions and classes should also start with `test_`.
- You can organize tests into subfolders like `tests/unit/`, `tests/integration/`, etc.

Example structure:
```
Jammin-Eats/
├── src/
├── tests/
│   ├── test_database_initialization.py
│   ├── unit/
│   │   └── test_state_machine.py
│   └── integration/
│       └── test_tutorial_flow.py
```

---

## 3. Running Tests

- Run **all tests**:
  ```sh
  pytest
  ```
- Run tests with detailed logging (recommended for troubleshooting):
  ```sh
  python run_test.py
  ```
- Run tests in a specific file:
  ```sh
  pytest tests/test_database_initialization.py
  ```
- Run tests in a specific folder:
  ```sh
  pytest tests/unit/
  ```
- Show extra info (verbose):
  ```sh
  pytest -v
  ```
- Generate test output file (for detailed error diagnosis):
  ```sh
  pytest -v > test_output.txt 2>&1
  ```
- Run tests with full tracebacks:
  ```sh
  pytest --tb=long
  ```

---

## 4. Writing New Tests

- Create a new file in `tests/` or a subfolder, named `test_something.py`.
- Write test functions starting with `test_`:
  ```python
  def test_example():
      assert 1 + 1 == 2
  ```
- You can use fixtures for setup/teardown (see Pytest docs for advanced usage).

---

## 5. Integrating New Tests

- Place new test files in the `tests/` folder or an appropriate subfolder.
- Make sure the test file and function names start with `test_`.
- Run `pytest` to verify your new tests are discovered and executed.
- If you want to run both `unittest` and `pytest` tests, pytest will auto-discover both.

---

## 6. Pre-commit Integration

Pre-commit hooks run a **fast subset** of the test suite (smoke tests) together with linting, formatting, and type checking on **every commit**. This gives you immediate feedback.

```bash
# Manually run all hooks, including the test subset
pre-commit run --all-files
```

Full tests still run in CI/CD pipelines and can be executed locally via `pytest`.

---

## 7. Continuous Integration (CI)

- Add `pytest` to your `requirements.txt` or development dependencies.
- In your CI pipeline, use the command:
  ```sh
  pytest
  ```
- This will ensure all tests are run automatically on every push or pull request.

---

## 8. Test Files Organization

All tests reside in the `tests/` folder (with unit/integration subfolders). Historical root-level test files have been migrated and the root is now reserved for entry scripts only.

1. **Tests directory:** 
   - Located in `tests/` folder with unit and integration subdirectories
   - Contains more focused tests for individual components
   - Reference implementations for core tests

---

## 8. Using run_test.py

The project includes a custom `run_test.py` script that provides enhanced test diagnostics:

```sh
python run_test.py
```

Key features:
- Runs tests with detailed logging
- Captures full traceback and error information
- Saves output to `test_output.txt` for easier troubleshooting
- Helps diagnose test skips and failures
- Essential for resolving complex test issues

---

## 9. Additional Tips

- Use `pytest --maxfail=1 --disable-warnings -v` for fast feedback.
- Use markers (e.g., `@pytest.mark.slow`) to categorize tests.
- For mocking game objects in tests, see examples in `test_states.py`.
- When testing state transitions, ensure all required methods are mocked (e.g., `change_state`).
- When running database tests, ensure the database is properly initialized and reset between tests.
- See [pytest documentation](https://docs.pytest.org/) for advanced features.

---

**Stay modular, keep your tests organized, and enjoy reliable development!**
